45426 Teste e Qualidade de Software

HW1: Mid-term assignment
I. Oliveira, v2025-10-31

Objectives
Develop a simple full-stack web application and a supporting test automation strategy, integrating
the concepts learned in the labs.
This is an individual assignment.

Required elements
Project scope
The ZeroMonos provides garbage collection services for multiple municipalities and is now
implementing a system to allow citizens to book the collection of large bulky waste items (such as
mattress, old appliances,…). For better customer satisfaction, the company wants a web portal and a
mobile app to allow citizens to do self-booking of items collection, ate their convenience.
The solution should support the following use cases:
•

A citizen can request the collecting of items for a specific date and approximate time slot. A basic
description of the item(s) should be provided.

•

For correct assignment of work lists, the citizen should pick its municipality from a closed list. It is
important that locations are correctly provided.

•

Upon successful booking, the user gets an access token to enable further inquiries (or even
cancelation) of the service booking. With the token, the citizen can check details for an active
reservation (and optionally cancel it).

•

Each service request goes through different states (received, assigned, in progress,…); the
evolution of states is (timestamped and) displayed in the details of an existing booking.

•

The system should enforce rules to prevent bookings that go beyond reasonable service level
limits or resource capabilities.

•

The Staff can see all services requests and update their state.

You should implement a backend (exposing a REST API) and a simplified web app to demonstrate the
core user stories. Variations on the subject are acceptable and welcome, given you meet the
mandatory requirements presented next.
The project must include:
1.

Your own API (REST) that can be invoked by external clients. Your API should allow one to
programmatically search the backend for service requests, create and check service bookings.

2.

A minimalist web app/page which allows users to enter new garbage collection requests. The
location (municipality) is mandatory for every request and should be selected from a list. You
should get the valid municipalities from an on-line resource/API (programmatically).

3.

Use a service ticket code (=token) to identify the booking to facilitate later queries (check the
reservation status given the access token).

4.

A page for the Staff to browse existing requests, per municipality (and update their status).

TQS HW | 1

5.

No user authentication is required for this project (web and API). You may opt to add (or “stub”)
user management services, but it is not mandatory. The “citizen facing” and “staff facing”
services can be available from different pages.

6.

Use some logger support (so that your solution produces a useful log of events).

Technologies stack
The solution should be based on Spring Boot for the services/backend. The web (presentation)
layer can be implemented with any HTML/JavaScript framework1.
Keep in mind that, for this assignment, it is much more important to have a robust backend than
investing (too much effort…) in the frontend.

Tests to implement
The project should include different types of tests:
A) Unit tests as applicable [suggestion: capture relevant domain rules in tests over the booking
services (Is there service in that day? Are there resources available?...) ].
B) Service tests, with dependency isolation using mocks (suggestion: test with isolation from
external data provider).
C) Integration tests on your own API (suggestion Spring Boot MockMvc and/or REST-Assured).
D) Functional testing (on the web interface). Suggested technology: BDD with Selenium WebDriver.
E) Performance tests.

Quality metrics
The project should include code quality metrics (e.g., from SonarQube). To do this, you should also
implement:
F) Integration of SonarQube code analysis. Note: If the Git project is public, it can be analyzed in
SonarCloud.

Extra points (optional)
For extra credits:
G) Add more entities to your data model (e.g.: manage work lists and assign work to employees).
H) Implement an “operations dashboard” for the Staff, enabling a visual monitoring of requests and
operations for each municipality.
I)

Implement Quality Gate enforcement in a continuous integration (CI) workflow.

Submission
The submission consists of:
1.

A brief Technical Report should explain the strategy that was adopted (your options as a
developer) and offer evidence of the results obtained (e.g.: which tests per testing level,
screenshots of the representative steps, (small) code snippets of the key parts, screenshots with

For web applications, Spring Boot supports the integration with templating systems (e.g.: thymeleaf).
However, this was not explored in classes and your are not required to use.
1

2 | TQS HW

45426 Teste e Qualidade de Software
the test results, etc.). The results of the SonarQube dashboard should be included (and
discussed). [A report template will be available.]
2.

The code project, committed to your TQS personal Git repository (under folder <my repo>/HW1).
Besides the code, be sure to include in the repository a short video (screencast) with a
demonstration of your solution.

3.

Oral presentation. To be scheduled → book a slot.

TQS HW | 3

